                                                                   On the MLC Conjecture and the
                                                             Renormalization Theory in Complex Dynamics
                                                                                             Dzmitry Dudko∗
arXiv:2512.24171v1 [math.DS] 30 Dec 2025




                                               Abstract. In this Note, we present recent developments in the Renormalization Theory of quadratic
                                           polynomials and discuss their applications, with an emphasis on the MLC conjecture, the problem of local
                                           connectivity of the Mandelbrot set, and on its geometric counterparts.

                                               1 Introduction. The Mandelbrot set M (Figure 1) is one of the most recognizable fractals in mathematics
                                           and beyond. It encodes the dynamical dependence of quadratic polynomials on the parameter. A central question
                                           in Complex Dynamics is the MLC Conjecture, also known as the Rigidity Conjecture:
                                               MLC Conjecture 1.1. The Mandelbrot set M is locally connected.
                                                This conjecture has various geometric and probabilistic counterparts; all of them are subjects of the
                                           Renormalization Theory of M, which analyzes first return maps to small neighborhoods of special points. Nature
                                           and the classification of these first return maps is in focus of this Note. Let us start by outlining its context.
                                                In Section 1 below, we give an informal introduction to renormalization ideas. Although the MLC is a
                                           topological statement, any substantial progress typically requires geometric input. Conjecture 1.2 states a simple
                                           geometric property of hyperbolic components that easily implies the MLC. A foundation of any renormalization
                                           theory is a priori bounds, see Conjecture 1.3: as we zoom into the Julia set and endow it with the first return
                                           map, we expect precompactness. A similar precompactness is expected in the parameter plane, see §1.4. In §1.3,
                                           we classify (sequences of) first return maps as either renorm-expanding or renorm-balanced. The exposition in
                                           Section 1 is conjectural, but it has been justified in many cases.
                                                Historical background is presented in Section 2, where we also sketch the evolution of key ideas and briefly
                                           comment on the higher-degree cases. The development of the renormalization theory can be broadly divided into
                                           several stages. First, as already mentioned, initial a priori bounds are required. These are used in justifying
                                           various rigidity properties, e.g., the MLC. Next, a detailed geometric analysis of the convergence of first-return
                                           maps follows; a desired goal is to establish the hyperbolicity of the associated operator. Finally, deep applications
                                           can be derived; for instance, the “regular vs stochastic” dichotomy describing the nature of chaos.
                                                Section 3 is dedicated to the theory of renormalization operators acting on infinite-dimensional spaces of
                                           maps. We recognize three types of renormalization regimes: near-Neutral, if some hyperbolic components become
                                           unbounded in the respective (small) parameter neighborhoods relative to the scale, Quadratic-Like, in the presence
                                           of intermediate hyperbolic components relative to the scale, and Puzzle (it is intertwined with the renorm-
                                           expanding notion), if all hyperbolic components become negligible relative to the scale. We outline the quadratic-
                                           like (“ql”) renormalization theory in its pure, bounded-type form. Its hyperbolicity program is now complete
                                           by Theorem 3.3, thanks to Theorem 4.1. We summarize the status of the near-Neutral Case and mention how
                                           Theorem 4.2 provides an opening towards the full hyperbolicity of the Neutral Renormalization and beyond,
                                           see §3.8. We will also discuss the puzzle regime in §3.9 and put forward Problem 3.1 on whether all these three
                                           regimes can be neatly integrated.
                                                In Section 4, on the Near-Degenerate Regime, we illustrate the sources of a priori bounds on dynamical
                                           scales representing definite positive-entropy “≥ ε > 0” (primitive ql and puzzle cases that are “ε-away” from the
                                           main Molecule) and zero-entropy (Molecule: neutral and bounded-type satellite ql) settings. We conclude by
                                           summarizing the current status of the MLC as two problems: completing the remaining unbounded satellite cases
                                           and developing interpolation techniques between definite positive and zero entropy settings. The former relies on

                                             ∗ Department of Mathematics, Stony Brook University, USA
                                               ``chaos''
                   zero
                  entropy                         11
                                                                                           M

                                               II i
                                   IIIIII iiII111
                                                11 11
                                                   11
                                                  11
                                                 111
                                                  11
                                                   1111111111



                                                   11
                                                         i'iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
                                                                                           c¤
               attractor for
              x 7! ¸x(1¡x)
                                          ¸¤                                           ¸
Figure 1: The Mandelbrot set (right) and the period-doubling cascade (left, colored in blue). The period-doubling
Feigenbaum parameter λ∗ ≃ c∗ marks the transition from zero entropy to positive entropy; it is where the “chaos”
emerges. This transition is universal; its complexification is shown in Figure 2.


further development of the theory behind almost-invariant pseudo-Siegel disks, Figure 14. For the latter, we put
forward a strategy based on partially invariant virtual Julia sets which control only partial postcritical sets. If
these programs are achieved, they would establish a priori bounds for all quadratic polynomials and open a clear
path towards the MLC (rigidity) and its geometric and probabilistic counterparts discussed in this Note.
     1.1 Renormalization: summary and motivation. The renormalization Rη pc of a quadratic polynomial
pc : z 7→ z 2 + c can be defined as the rescaled first return map to a small η-neighborhood of the critical value,
see (1.2). A single iterate of Rη pc controls a long finite orbit of pc . Hence, instead of iterating pc , we wish to
iterate renormalization
                                                                                                       “ lim ”
(1.1)                     pc ⇝ Rη1 pc ⇝ Rη2 pc ⇝ . . . ⇝ Rηn pc ⇝ . . .                                −→

and then deduce strong dynamical consequences for pc . To realize such a vision, initial a priori bounds
(precompactness conditions) are required, see Conjecture 1.3.
                                                    ′
    We have two cases. If the derivative Rηn pc (z) typically grows, then we should expect an almost linear
                                             

phase-parameter relationship between M and Jc at c as illustrated in Figure 8. We call this regime renorm-
                                                                                              ′
expanding, see §1.3; it is controlled by puzzles. On the other hand, if the derivative Rηn pc (z) is bounded, then
there should be geometric limits for the renormalization, see (1.3). We refer to this regime as renorm-balanced.
    1.2 Hyperbolic components. For a hyperbolic component H ⊂ M, we denote by MH the associated
small copy of M centered at H. We recall that H consists of parameters with an attracting periodic cycle and
can be of two types, see Figure 3: satellite, when H is an analytic disk, and primitive, when H is an analytic
image of the filled cardioid. On pictures, hyperbolic components always have a flawless shape.
    Conjecture 1.2 (Bounded geometry of H ⊂ MH ). Every closed hyperbolic component H is a uniform qc
disk or a uniform qc filled cardioid; its diameter diam(H) is uniformly comparable to diam(MH ).
Conjecture 1.2 easily implies the MLC: if MHn is a sequence of strictly nested small copies of M, then the
diameter of MHn shrinks because of finiteness of the area:
        X             2 X           2 X                                                             \
             diam(MHn ) ∼     diam(Hn ) ∼   area(Hn ) < ∞,                                      thus         MHn is a singleton.
        n                      n                                                   n                   n≥1


This implies the MLC by Yoccoz’s results, see (2.1). For primitive H, Conjecture 1.2 is expected to follow from
a priori bounds of ql type §3.2; cf. Conjecture 1.3 below. For satellite H, the hyperbolicity of the Molecule
renormalization is likely necessary, see Conjecture 3.6.
   1.3 Dynamical limits. Let us consider the dynamical plane of pc for a non-parabolic c ∈ ∂M.
(Renormalizations for parabolic c ∈ ∂M arise through limits cn → c, see §3.5.) For a small η > 0 and the
                                                         zoom



                            c¤                                     c¤




 Figure 2: The universality of the Mandelbrot set at the period-doubling Feigenbaum parameter c∗ , see also
 Figure 1. The renormalization theory justifying this universality has been successfully developed in the 1990s,
 see §2. The MLC at c∗ has been recently established in Theorem 4.1.


 associated η-neighborhood of the critical value c, the renormalization Rη pc of pc is the rescaled first return map
 of pc from this η-neighborhood back to itself; we write:
                              h 
                                   η-rescaled
                                              i       1 q           
 (1.2)                         pqc                                                    pc (z) = z 2 + c,
                                                               
                  Rη pc (z) =                   (z) =   pc ηz + c − c ,
                                                      η

 where q ≡ q(ηz + c) is the first return time of the point ηz + c back to the η-neighborhood of c. The η-rescaling
 identifies the η-neighborhood of c with the 1-neighborhood of 0.
     Conjecture 1.3 (Uniform a priori bounds). With appropriate understanding, the family of renormaliza-
 tions (1.2) is precompact uniformly over all η > 0 and c ∈ ∂M.
 In particular, as we zoom into the Julia set Jc of pc at c, the shape of Jc (e.g., its veins) should stay within a
 precompact class of configurations. Let us detail more what we expect from Conjecture 1.3.
     In (1.2), different points can have different return times; and some points may not return to the selected
 neighborhood. Consider an iterate pqc realizing a first return of some point in the η-neighborhood of c back to the
                                                               (q)        η-rescaled
 neighorhood. Rescaling pqc , we obtain a globalized branch Rη pc ≡ pqc               : C → C of Rη pc .
     Consider now a sequence ηn → 0 and the associated renormalizations Rηn pc . We refer to the ηn ’s as dynamical
 scales. Up to passing to a subsequence, we anticipate only two possibilities:
                                                                         (q ) ′
(Exp) renorm-expanding case: for all choices of branches, the derivative Rηnn pc (z) tends to infinity for a typical
      (roughly, non-critical) z ∈ C; or

(Ren) renorm-balanced case: for some choices of globalized branches, there is a well-defined geometric limit,
      transcendental or polynomial (locally uniformly on UG ):

      (1.3)                 ∃ G : UG → C = lim R(q        n)
                                                                  
                                                        ηn pc : C → C ,        ηn → 0.
                                                   n→∞


 We anticipate that the renorm-balanced case (Ren) occurs when certain hyperbolic components near c do not
 shrink in the respective parameter scales (see §1.4), so that the periodic cycles associated with such non-negligible
 hyperbolic components prevent expansion; cf. Conjecture 1.2.
     By considering all sequences of dynamical scales ηn → 0, we say that c ∈ M is

    • pure renorm-expanding, if it is renorm-expanding with respect to any ηn → 0; and

    • pure renorm-balanced, if it is renorm-balanced with respect to any ηn → 0.
                           Primitive
                                                                                    Satellite




Figure 3: Primitive and satellite hyperbolic components. Around every hyperbolic component, there is an
associated primitive or satellite little copy of the Mandelbrot set. It is expected, cf. Conjecture 1.2, that all
hyperbolic components have uniform geometry. The difference between the satellite (zero entropy) and primitive
(positive entropy) cases is profound and has many implications; e.g., see Figures 12 and 13.


     There are four main renormalization theories in the pure renorm-balanced case: primitive/satellite quadratic-
like, near-parabolic, and near-Siegel; the last two are subtypes of near-neutral. These theories have many
similarities as well as certain fundamental differences. The general case is a combination of all the above regimes,
where various dynamical scales of pc can exhibit different renormalization flavors; see Section 3 and Question 3.1.
    1.4 Parameter limits. Recall [10] that the parameter and dynamical Böttcher functions provide conformal
identification of C
                  b \ M and C
                            b \ Jc . Therefore, dynamical scales ηn as in §1.3 have associated parameter scales δn
defined up to appropriate choices. Let us write the parameter counterpart to (1.2):
                                                      (δ, η)-rescaled       1 q                        
(1.4)
                                                                                                 
             R(δ,η) pc+τ    τ ∈C
                                 =        pc+τ   τ ∈C
                                                                           =     pc+δτ ηz + c + δτ − c − δτ ,
                                                                               η
i.e., all nearby maps pc+δτ are η-rescaled with respect to the same return times as pc , while the parameter
dependence is δ-rescaled. The notion of branches is defined accordingly.
     Similar to Conjecture 1.3, we expect the precompactness of (1.4) to hold uniformly over all c and across all
scales. In fact, we anticipate much stronger properties: convergence toward the limits should be exponentially
fast, under an appropriate understanding, both in the parameter and dynamical planes, see §3. Such statements
are commonly referred to as universality and are illustrated in various figures throughout this Note.
    2 Historical Perspective. The problem of local connectivity of the Mandelbrot set M, known as the
MLC Conjecture, was put forward in the 1980s by Douady and Hubbard, who also developed the foundational
theory of M, [10, 11]. It was the time when the first computer pictures of M were generated; these pictures, ever
since, have been providing invaluable guidance in research.
    Yoccoz’ results from the early 1990s reduced the MLC Conjecture to the following rigidity statement [23]:

(2.1)       if   M1 ⊋ M2 ⊋ · · · ⊋ Mn ⊋ . . .               are nested small copies of M,
                                                                                   ∞
                                                                                   \
                                                                          then         Mn = {c}      is a singleton.
                                                                                      n=1

This linked the MLC to the renormalization theory.
    Before the Mandelbrot set and its pictures, there has been the Logistic Family which encodes the real vein
M ∩ R of the Mandelbrot set:

(2.2)                             x 7→ λx(1 − x) : [0, 1] ý ,                     λ ∈ [0, 4].

The discovery of chaos is due to Poincaré (sensitive dependence combined with recurrence in the 3-body problem,
the late 19th century). In an attempt to understand this phenomenon, much of the research activity in the second
half of the 20th century was focused on the study of the Logistic Family (e.g., Ulam, Neumann in the 1940s,
                                                             zoom
                                                                                    c²



                                        c²
Figure 4: Universality of the Mandelbrot set at the golden-mean Siegel parameter c• . The dynamical universality
of z 2 +c• is depicted in Figure 5. Theorem 3.4 completed the program towards the hyperbolicity of the near-Siegel
renormalization of bounded-type.


Lorenz, Myrberg, Sharkovsky in the 1960s, Misiurewicz, Guckenheimer in the 1970s). The Combinatorial Theory
of (2.2) was designed by Milnor and Thurston in the late 1970s in terms of kneading sequences.
     Fifty years ago, the period-doubling universality in (2.2) was discovered by Feigenbaum [21] (the parameter
universality) and, independently, by Tresser and Collet [9] (the dynamical universality); see Figures 1 and 2. This
was the beginning of the Renormalization Theory in Dynamics; many renormalization ideas have been imported
from Quantum Field Theory and Statistical Mechanics. The first computer-assisted proof of the period-doubling
universality was presented by Lanford [33] in the early 1980s. A computer-free proof, with numerous extensions
to other cases, was only achieved in the late 1990s using complex methods.
     In his address to the ICM in 1986 [47], Sullivan proposed a program to approach the period-doubling
universality based upon Teichmüller theory by employing the Douady-Hubbard quadratic-like theory. Sullivan
partially realized this program in [48] by constructing a renormalization fixed point and justifying (non-
exponential) convergence towards the fixed point within its hybrid class. The exponential convergence (the
dynamical universality) was justified by McMullen in [41]. The program was completed by Lyubich in [36] who
established the parameter universality.
     Meanwhile, a complete renormalization theory has been successfully developed for the Logistic Family [40,
35, 22], culminating in the “regular vs stochastic” dichotomy [38] by Lyubich; i.e., the Logistic Family became
the first natural class of maps outside of the hyperbolic setting for which chaos was well understood. Later, the
dichotomy was refined to “regular vs Collet-Eckmann” by Avila and Moreira in [4].
     In its foundation, the success with the Logistic Family relied on real a priori bounds which are unavailable
for genuine complex maps. Moreover, various near-Neutral phenomena are not witnessed by the Logistic Family.
For instance, there are Julia sets that are not Locally Connected – the non-JLC Category. Even if the Julia set of
a map is locally connected, the map can have many renormalization “near non-JLC” levels where ql-bounds fail.
     Interest in the near-Neutral/Rotational Dynamics is rooted in the classical Celestial Mechanics. The first
breakthroughs in the linearization of circle diffeomorphisms and local maps were made by Denjoy (1932) and
Siegel (1942). In the 1950s and 60s, the Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser (KAM) theory emerged, resulting in the
reenvision of the near-rotation phenomenon in Mathematics and Physics. The Renormalization Ideas introduced
in the mid-1970s led, in particular, to numerous conjectures in Low-Dimensional Dynamics, including the nature
of the KAM small divisor problem. The theory of analytic circle diffeomorphisms and Local Theory for neutral
holomorphic germs and quadratic polynomials received an essentially complete treatment in the second half of the
last century in the work by Arnold (in the KAM framework), Cherry, Bruno, Herman, Yoccoz, and Perez-Marco.
     For quadratic polynomials, the Neutral Family

(2.3)                                z 7→ e2πiθ z + z 2 : C ý,      θ ∈ R/Z,

encodes the boundary of the main hyperbolic component of M. There are two renormalization theories that
                                                        zoom


                                              c²
                                                                                        c²
             Douady-Ghys
              qc-surgery                                                 Limiting Transcendental
                                      z 2 + c²
                                                                                    Dynamics
Figure 5: The universality of the Golden Siegel map z 2 + c• , where the parameter c• is depicted in Figure 4. The
source of a priori bounds for the respective renormalization theory is the Douady-Ghys qc surgery; it transfers
real a priori bounds from Blaschke maps to complex Siegel polynomials of bounded-type.



analyze the Global Theory of the Neutral Family.
     Renormalization Theory of (bounded-type) Siegel maps, also initiated by physicists, was mathematically
designed by McMullen in [42] in the mid-1990s. He established the dynamical universality as shown in Figure 5.
The parameter counterpart, Figure 4, was developed two decades later in [20, 17], using the framework of the
pacman renormalization. Theorem 3.4 states the hyperbolicity of the associated renormalization; its proof employs
Transcendental Dynamics §3.7.
     The significance of the near-parabolic renormalization (see Figures 6 and 7) has been demonstrated by
Shishikura in the 1990s in [43], where he showed that the Hausdorff dimension of ∂M is equal to 2. (The
area of ∂M is expected to be 0, see §3.8.) The argument in [43] involved two iterates of the near-parabolic
renormalization. Control of infinite iterates became available in the mid-2000s when Inou and Shishikura
established the hyperbolicity of the near-parabolic renormalization. New sectorial a priori bounds, see Figure 10,
were put forward and justified in the perturbative regime; these were the first bounds in the non-JLC Category.
Many applications followed. For instance, the first examples of positive area Julia sets were constructed by Buff
and Chéritat in [6], and then, of a different type, by Avila and Lyubich [2]. In the mid-2010s, exact models of the
postcritical sets were produced for neutral maps (Siegel and Cremer) [44, 8] in the Inou-Shishikura class.
     Many global properties of the Neutral Family (2.3) are closely linked to those of unicritical circle maps; cf. the
Douady-Ghys qc-surgery in Figure 5. The Renormalization Theory of unicritical circle maps was fully developed
(up to uniform hyperbolicity) in the works of de Faria, de Melo, and Yampolsky by the early 2000s.
     In the mid-2000s, motivated by W. Thurston’s work on 3-manifolds and postcritically finite rational
maps [50, 12], Kahn introduced the Near-Degenerate regime to Renormalization theory [25]. Jointly with Lyubich,
they developed a machinery [30, 27, 28] that established quadratic-like a priori bounds for ql-combinatorics of
positive core-entropy ≥ ε > 0. It became apparent that this new theory provides an adequate replacement for the
framework of real a priori bounds in the genuine complex setting. However, at that time, the theory could not
handle the zero-entropy setting (e.g., the non-JLC Category), and its development halted for more than a decade.
     The Near-Degenerate regime in the zero-entropy setting was designed in [16], see Theorem 4.2, using the
framework of almost-invariant pseudo-Siegel disks. Theorem 4.2 established a priori bounds for all maps in
the Neutral Family (2.3); in particular, providing the first non-perturbative a priori bounds in the non-JLC
Category. Various ideas behind [16] shaped follow-up research activities. In particular, Theorem 4.1, [18] has
finally confirmed the MLC at the classical period-doubling Feigenbaum parameter shown in Figures 1 and 2.
     Advances in the renormalization theory of the Mandelbrot set have often provided guidance for more general
settings. In the 2000s, various deep results for the Logistic Family have been extended to more general classes of
real analytic maps; see [3, 32, 31]. For higher-degree polynomials, the Fibonacci-type renormalization discovered
in [39] does not degenerate; employing the real bounds, this renormalization was successfully understood,
                                                           zoom

                                           1=4                                                   zoom



                                                                 Elephants   an
                                                                                    bn

                                  1
                           z2 +
                                  4




  Figure 6: Parabolic Enrichment. Top: the Elephant structure in the parameter plane. Bottom: dynamical planes
                                               q                                              [1] 
  p1/4 , pan , pbn . As n → ∞, the pair pan , pa1,n   converges to the commuting pair p1/4 , pa∞ , see Figure 7, where
                                                    
                                                 n
   [1]                                                                                      q                         [1]
  pa∞ is the associated Lavaurs transcendental map. Similarly, the neutral pairs (pbn , pbn1,n ) converge to (p1/4 , pb∞ ).
  Lavaurs limits in the neutral case are efficiently encoded by continued fractions, see §3.4.


  see [45, 46]. With the introduction of the Near-Degenerate Regime, the complex Fibonacci case also became
  amenable to control, leading to generalizations of Yoccoz-type results to higher-degree polynomials [29, 1].
  Recently, in my joint work with Drach [13], Yoccoz-type realization and rigidity results were established for
  Transcendental Dynamics (for maps of controlled finite order and without asymptotic values) by developing a
  transcendental version of the near-degenerate analysis.
      In the 2020s, the Near-Degenerate regime has also been introduced for rational maps. In my joint work with
  Luo [15], a priori bounds were established for hyperbolic components of disjoint type in the space of rational
  maps, leading to various realization results. This confirms McMullen’s conjecture in the disjoint-type case from
  the 1990s, which asserts that Sierpiński hyperbolic components are bounded. Simultaneously, Kahn [26] presented
  an independent approach with a different scope to a priori bounds for establishing McMullen’s conjecture (for all
  Sierpiński cases). Meanwhile, Lim [34] established bounds for rotating Herman curves of bounded-type rotation
  speed, leading to the development of the corresponding renormalization theory.
      A popular version of the MLC story has been presented in a 2024 Quanta Magazine article [7].
      3 Renormalization operators. Following the discovery of the period-doubling universality (Figure 1), the
  framework of analytic renormalization operators acting on infinite-dimensional spaces of maps was put forward.
  The hyperbolicity of such operators always yields important consequences. There are two kinds of hyperbolicity
  frameworks:
 (QL) Quadratic-Like Renormalization acting on ql maps as illustrated in Figure 9, top; and
(Neut) Near-Neutral (Cylinder or Sectorial) Renormalization, see Figures 10 and 7.
         In addition to the (QL) and (Neut) Cases, let us also recognize:
 (Puz) Puzzle (or generalized ql) Renormalization encoding the first return map to a puzzle, Figure 9, bottom.
      The (QL) bounded-type case is classical and
                                              T now complete. The bounded-type condition refers to parameters
  c within nested intersection of small copies n Mn as in (2.1), so that the relative periods of Mn+1 rel Mn
                                              ¡          [1] ¢
            p1=4                                p a 1; p a 1 =                                   pa n
                                                     ¡         q1;n ¢
                                              lim pan; pan ;
                                                  n

                                              pa1 = p1=4




            Cylinder                 ps1=4 +1                lim                        psan +1
            Renorm-n : +1                                                     +1


                                                                                        q1;n¡s
               attracting           linear            repelling                       pa n
               cylinder                               cylinder
                            ¡1                ¡1                              ¡1                 ¡1
                                                                q
Figure 7: Top: as an → 1/4, see Figure 6, the first return map pn1,n converges to the transcendental Lavaurs map
 [1]
pa∞ commuting with p1/4 . Bottom: the associated cylinder renormalization. See §3.5 for details.



are uniformly bounded. Equivalently, in the dynamical planes of pc , for every dynamical scale η (as in §1.3), pc
has a quadratic-like structure pqc : U ′ → V ′ with a non-escaping critical orbit so that |V ′ | ≍ η. Similarly, the
name “bounded-type” is used elsewhere in the renormalization theory, e.g., for neutral maps. In the late 1990s,
the hyperbolicity problem in the bounded-type ql case was reduced to the justification of quadratic-like bounds.
They have been recently supplied by Theorem 4.1, completing the program; see Theorem 3.3.
    The hyperbolicity theory for neutral maps emerged in the mid-2000s, when Inou and Shishikura established the
hyperbolicity for near-parabolic renormalization. We will state this result in §3.6. The hyperbolicity of near-Siegel
renormalization was established a decade later; see §3.7. The neutral and satellite ql renormalization naturally
form the Molecule renormalization, see Figure 11 and §3.8. The hyperbolicity of such a renormalization is likely
required for Conjecture 1.2 and the area-zero conjecture on ∂M. Conjecturally, there is no renorm-expanding
regime on the Molecule: every parameter there has substantial hyperbolic components in all scales.
    In short, the Puzzle Renormalization deals with the renorm-expanding (see §1.3) and “virtual primitive ql”
(central cascades §3.9) regimes. In the renorm-expanding regime, there are no geometric limits as in (1.3), but
there is a strong phase-parameter relation between the Mandelbrot and Julia sets as illustrated in Figure 8. One
may hope that this case can also be neatly integrated into the hyperbolicity framework:
    Question 3.1 (Uniform hyperbolicity rel ∂M). Is there a renormalization operator of a hyperbolic nature,
associated with all parameters and scales of ∂M, with dimension 1 unstable directions, such that the operator
combines all the above kinds of renormalization regimes: (QL), (Neut), (Puz)?

Here is a hoped-for universality statement from a desired operator in Question 3.1. Consider a continuous zooming-
in at c ∈ ∂M. If in a small δ-scale of c, all hyperbolic components of M are small rel δ, then we expect a form
of Tan-Lei type similarity between M and Jc as depicted in Figure 8. If there is an unbounded (of size ≫ δ)
hyperbolic component of M hitting the δ-scale of c, cf. Figure 4, then we anticipate strong near-Neutral effects.
And if all non-negligible hyperbolic components of M are intermediate in the δ-scale of c, cf. Figure 2, then the
quadratic-like features emerge. Finally, if the δ1 scale of c1 is combinatorially close to the δ2 -scale of c2 , then
these scales should also be close geometrically. The last statement is a standard application of the hyperbolicity
framework of the renormalization.
                                                                      c
               M
                                  c
                                                                                      Jc

              zoom                                                 zoom




                                                       '                             c
                                c
                                                     almost
                                                     linear

Figure 8: It is natural to ask if a form of Tan-Lei type similarity [49] (e.g., for the vein structure) between
respective small neighborhoods of M and Jc at c occurs if and only if (parameter) hyperbolic components of M
become negligible; this is related to the notion of the renorm-expanding in §1.3. For puzzles and parapuzzles, the
Almost-Linear relation (similarity) was established for Yoccoz maps in [37], see §3.9.


                                                                                                               2:1
    3.1 Analytic and laminar structures on the space of ql maps. A quadratic-like map f : U −→ V
is a degree 2 holomorphic branched covering between open disks U ⋐ V ⋐ C, see Figure 9. The set of its
non-escaping points Kf := {z ∈ U : f n (z) ∈ U ∀n ≥ 1} is called the filled Julia set of f : U → V . The
boundary Jf := ∂Kf is the Julia set of f . The Julia set is connected if and only if the unique critical point of f
is non-escaping. In this case, f is hybrid equivalent to a unique polynomial pc : z 7→ z 2 + c with c = c(f ) ∈ M:
there is a qc conjugacy h between f : U → V and a quadratic-like restriction pc : A → B such that h is conformal
on the non-escaping sets.
    Here and elsewhere, by a slight thinning of V and U, we can assume that U is a closed topological disk. A
small Banach neighborhood of f : U → V is the set of all analytic maps close to f in the sup-norm:

(3.1)                                 Bε (f | U ) = {g : U → V : ∥f − g∥U ≤ ε}.

Let V ′ ⋐ V be a slight thinning of V . If ε is sufficiently small, then every g ∈ Bε (f | U ) admits a quadratic-like
                   2:1
structure g : Ug −→ V ′ , where Ug is the unique g-lift of V ′ . This naturally introduces complex analytic structure
for quadratic-like maps. There are two natural equivalences on the space of quadratic-like maps f : U → V : linear
conjugacy (i.e., rescaling) and thickening/thinning U and V . In [36], respecting these equivalences, the space of all
quadratic-like maps QL was supplied with complex-analytic structure induced by small Banach balls as in (3.1).
In this space, hybrid-equivalent maps form a codimension 1 lamination with analytic leaves. The holonomy along
hybrid leaves is qc and is asymptotically conformal. Such a holonomy combined with the hyperbolicity rigorously
justifies various universalities as in Figure 2. For near-Neutral Renormalization, establishing an appropriate
version of the following consequence of the laminar structure is one of the key technical challenges, see §3.7, §3.8.
   Lemma 3.2 ([36], codim = 1 stability of a ql f ). Let f : U → V be a ql map with a connected Julia set as
above. Then, for a small ε > 0, there is an analytic function τ : Bε (f | U ) → C such that f, g ∈ Bε (f | U ) are
hybrid conjugate if and only if τ (f ) = τ (g).
                                               f                             zoom                               f1
                                                                                                    V1
                                         V
                                               U                f1 = f p                              U1




                                     2:1
             1:1
                                                    g
                                                                                         X
                                               Y1
                                                                                                                    Y1
                                                    g1 is the ¯rst return
                                Y                   map of g back to Y1
                                                                                                                g1
                                                                           2:1                                2:1
Figure 9: Top: Quadratic-Like Renormalization f1 = f p : U1 −→ V1 is obtained from f : U −→ V by iterating,
restricting, and then linear rescaling, see §3.3. Bottom: Puzzle (or generalized ql) Renormalization is the first
return map to a puzzle Y1 , see §3.9.

                                                              2:1
    3.2   QL Compactness. Given a ql map f : U −→ V , its modulus is either
(3.2)                mod(f ) := mod(V \ U )                or                    mod+ (f ) := mod(V \ Kf );
both quantities are compatible. If Kf is a Cantor set, then mod+ (f ) is the supremum of moduli over all annuli
in the correct homotopy class separating ∂V from Kf . Given a δ > 0, the space of ql maps with mod+ (f ) ≥ δ is
compact: every sequence of ql maps fn with mod+ (fn ) ≥ δ has a convergent subsequence within QL; the limit
f∞ also satisfies mod+ (f∞ ) ≥ δ. More generally, instead of separating ∂V and Kf , we can measure the separation
between ∂V and the postcritical set. (In this framework, sequential limits of ql maps are, in general, outside the
QL space.) This approach is adopted for near-neutral maps where the classical ql bounds fail, see §3.4.
                                                                                                                         2:1
     3.3 QL Renormalization operator. As Figure 9 illustrates, a ql renormalization f1 = f p : U1 −→ V1
            2:1
of f : U −→ V is obtained by iterating f followed by a ql-restriction and a linear rescaling. Since all three
operations are analytic, the renormalization admits a natural analytic extension to nearby maps; we refer to such
an extension as a renormalization operator. Below, we first introduce a non-dynamical analytic operator. By
design, it is always compact: the image of a ball is precompact. If there are appropriate geometric bounds, then
the operator becomes dynamical and hyperbolic.
     Let U ′ ⋐ U and V ′ ⊂ V be slight thinning of U and V with δ := mod(U \ U ′ ). It is a fundamental fact
(follows from Cauchy’s integral formula) that the restriction operator
(3.3)                    Bε (f | U ) → Bε (f | U ′ ),               [g : U → C] 7→ [g : U ′ → C]
                                                                                                                               2:1
is compact. Here ε in Bε (f | U ), see (3.1), is chosen sufficiently small depending on δ. Viewing f1 ≡ f p : U1 −→
                              2:1
V1 as a subsystem of f : U −→ V , we assume the following the compactness condition:
                      p−1
                      [
(3.4)                        f i (U1 ) ⋐ U ′          where         δ := mod(U \ U ′ )          as above;
                       i=0
                                                        ³      ´.
                                                          [1]
                                                  fn+1 = fn jS
                                                                    fn


                                  S

                             fn        0                                 ±             fn+1
                                                                    D ' S fn      0
                                      orbq1(S)



                                  D
Figure 10: Sector Renormalization §3.4 is the first return map to a sector S whose sides are glued dynamically.


i.e., the forward orbits of points in U1 stay in U ′ until their first return to V1 ⊂ V ′ . Then, since the restriction
operator (3.3) is compact, we obtain a compact non-dynamical analytic operator

(3.5)                  R : Bε (f1 | U ) → Bε2 (f p | U1 ),    [g|U ] 7→ [g|U ′ ] 7→ [g1 = g p |U1 ].
                                                                                                            2:1
     Suppose that f ≡ f0 is infinitely ql-renormalizable: there is an infinite sequence fn : Un −→ Vn with
         p
fn+1 = fnn+1 as before. We also assume that δ > 0 is selected uniformly over fn and that the periods pn ≤ p are
uniformly bounded. If the sequence fn : Un → Vn has geometric bounds mod+ (fn ) ≥ η > 0, see (3.2), then, by
the compactness of ql maps, the ω-limit set Hf of (fn )n is compact. Such a limit set H is called a renormalization
horseshoe. If the geometric bounds have an additional “beau” property (it is often the case), then Hf is a hyperbolic
set of R. Similarly, a renormalization horseshoe HX is defined for a set of maps X = {fτ ≡ f0,τ }. It is natural to
construct a horseshoe as big as possible. Applying Theorem 4.1 together with [36], we obtain:
    Theorem 3.3 (Hyperbolicity, (QL) Case).      For every bound p on renormalization periods, there is a
hyperbolic renormalization horseshoe Hp with dim = 1 unstable manifolds for the ql renormalization operator as
above. The horseshoe Hp attracts exponentially fast all infinitely renormalizable ql maps f ≡ f0 with relative
periods pn ≤ p.

    3.4 Sector Renormalization. The Sector Renormalization was originally designed to study Local
Dynamics around an indifferent fixed point by Douady and Yoccoz, with various ideas going back to the
theory of Ecalle-Voronin’s invariants. For high-type rotation numbers, Inou and Shishikura extended the sector
renormalization to a semi-global compact operator with geometric control of the critical orbit. Here, we provide
more details on the semi-global case.
    The idea of sector renormalization Rsec is illustrated in Figure 10. In short, it is the first return map of fn
to the appropriately chosen sector S so that the critical orbit returns to S. Let us start with notation:
   • Θ = {θ = [0; a1 , a2 , . . . ] | ai ∈ N≥1 } ≃ [0, 1] \ Q ≃ (R/Z) \ Q is the set of irrational rotation numbers written
     as continued fractions;
   • Θbnd = {θ = [0; a1 , a2 , . . . ] | ai ≤ Mθ } ⊂ Θ is the set of bounded (irrational) rotation numbers;
   • Θ = {θ = [0; a1 , a2 , . . . ] | ai ∈ N≥1 ∪ {∞}} ⊃ Θ is the formal compactification of Θ;
   • Θ>N = {θ = [0; a1 , a2 , . . . ] | ai ∈ N>N };
   • fθ : z 7→ e2πiθ z + z 2 , θ ∈ Θ is an irrationally-neutral quadratic polynomial as in (2.3),
   • pn /qn ≈ θ is the best approximants of θ ∈ Θ starting with q0 = 1,
   • fn ≡ fn,θ := Rnsec fθ is the nth sector renormalization;
   • if θ ∈ Θ>1 , then θn := (−1)n [0; an+1 , an+2 , . . . ] is the rotation number of fn and
       [n]                                                         [n]
     fθ := fθqn is the sector prerenormalization of fn = fθ /f [n−1] .
                                                                         θ
                            [n]
The definitions of θn and fθ      require a minor adjustment for the general case “θ ∈ Θ”. We view fn = Rnsec fθ as

(3.6)                    fn : D 99K D            fn (0) = 0,     fn (0) = e2πiθn ,   θn ∈ Θ.

The sector renormalization fn+1 of fn as shown in Figure 10 is the first return map to the smallest sector S
bounded by curves γ and fn (γ) emerging from 0 so that the sides γ, fn (γ) ⊂ S are dynamically glued by fn :

(3.7)                          γ ∋ x ∼ fn (x) ∈ fn (γ)            so that       S/fn ≃ D.

We assume that γ lands at 0 at a well-defined angle. The “smallest” condition on S refers to the requirement
that S contains the smallest angle between γ and fn (γ). The sector S should be chosen appropriately so that
the first return map to S controls the critical orbit. Before taking the quotient (3.7), the first return map is a
                                       [1]     q (θ )    q (θ )±1 
commuting pair of the form Fn = fn ≡ fn1 n , fn1 n                  . The quotient map by fn identifies both branches
                                                                [1]                                             [1]
in the commuting pair Fn ; we can write fn+1 = Rsec fn = fn /fn ≡ Fn /fn+1 , and we refer to both Fn and fn as
                                                        [n]
the sector prerenormalizations of fn+1 . Similarly, fθ is the nth sector prerenormalization of fn , and we write:
        [n]
fn = fθ /f [n−1] . As in the quadratic-like case, see (3.4), we require a compactness condition:
              θ


(3.8)                                          mod D \ orbq1 (S) ≥ δ,
                                                                


where orbq1 (S) is formed by orbit trajectories of points in S projecting to dom(fn+1 ). We refer to (3.8) as
sectorial bounds; they imply the compactness of Rsec . As an application of Theorem 4.2, the compact sectorial
renormalization operator Rsec is justified in [19] for all neutral quadratic polynomials (fθ )θ∈Θ with a compactness
condition (3.8) for a uniform δ and with well-defined parabolic limits parametrized by Θ.
    3.5 Parabolic Enrichment and the Cylinder Renormalization. We recall that the filled Julia set is
discontinuous at parabolic parameters: as shown in Figure 6, the limit of filled Julia sets can be smaller than
the filled Julia set of the limiting parameter. This discontinuity can be resolved by introducing limiting Lavaurs
maps. Let us illustrate a general idea with examples.
    Consider a sequence of parameters an → 1/4 as shown in Figure 6. In the dynamical plane of pan : z 7→ z 2 +an ,
see Figure 7, the critical orbit returns after q1,n ≡ q1 (an ) iterates. The orbit spends q1,n − s iterations traveling
from the red cylinder to the blue cylinder, and then s iterations traveling back. We have a commuting pair
        q                                                              q1,n                                       [1]
          n ). In the limit, the parabolic gap is closed, and (pan , pan ) converges to the pair (p1/4 = pa∞ , pa∞ ),
(pan , pa1,n
        [1]
where pa∞ is a transcendental Lavaurs map defined on the attracting basin of the parabolic point of p1/4 . The
red and blue cylinders converge to the limiting attracting and repelling cylinders of p1/4 .
    The cylinder renormalization Rcyl is a convenient and canonical extension of a sector renormalization Rsec
from §3.4 such that the renormalization sector of Rsec is extended to a cylinder of Rcyl . While Rsec is defined
up to conformal conjugacy, Rcyl is defined up to a linear conjugacy. For pan , its cylinder renormalization
               q
                 n /pan is the first return map of pan back to the red cylinder, where its boundaries are identified
Rcyl (pan ) ≃ pa1,n
                                                                [1]                                             [1]
using pan . The limiting cylinder renormalization Rcyl p1/4 , pa∞ , also known as parabolic, is the quotient of pa∞
under p1/4 . We write

                                                                                [1] 
(3.9)                      Rcyl (pan ) ≃ pqa1,n           −→ Rcyl p1/4 , p[1]
                                                                             
                                            n    p   an
                                                                          a∞ ≃ p1/4 p   1/4
                                                                                              ,

                                                                 [1]            [1] 
and refer to Rcyl (pan ) as near-parabolic for n ≫ 1. In fact, pa∞ and Rcyl pa∞ are uniquely determined by
a linear map, called a transitional map, between red and blue cylinders, see the bottom-left part of Figure 7.
Conversely, given a transitional map, one can construct the associated Lavaurs map and then realize it as a limit
of nearby maps. A fundamental question is the dynamical control of this parabolic enrichment. As it was discussed
in §3.4, renormalization of neutral quadratic polynomials is parametrized by θ = [0; a1 , a2 , . . . ] ∈ Θ. Parabolic
renormalization applies to the cases where ai = ∞. For illustration, see parameters bn in Figure 6.
    3.6 Hyperbolicity of the near-parabolic renormalizations. In [24], the hyperbolicity of the cylinder
renormalization has been established for high-type parameters θ ∈ Θ≤N , where N ≫ 1. The hyperbolicity
implies the sectorial bounds as they were introduced in §3.4. As we mentioned in Section 2, this result had many
                                 Molecule                                    z(z + 1)2
                                  map




Figure 11: Left: the Main Molecule M of the Mandelbrot set and the induced by the Branner-Douady surgery
Molecule map, see §3.8. The Molecule map is modeled by z 7→ z(z + 1)2 , right.


applications. The strategy in [24] is as follows. First, with computer assistance, the a priori bounds (a variant
of (3.8)) are established for the parabolic renormalization representing

                                    [0; ∞, ∞, ∞, . . . ] ∈ Θ,        see §3.4.

Using Teichmüller contraction, the geometric bounds are promoted to the hyperbolicity of the associated parabolic
renormalization. By the stability of hyperbolicity, it also holds for all θ ∈ Θ>N for some N ≫ 1.
     3.7 Hyperbolicity of near-Siegel Renormalization. Following notations of 3.4, consider maps fθ : z 7→
e2πiθ z + z 2 . For θ ∈ Θbnd , the Douady-Ghys surgery transfers real bounds from circle maps (the Blaschke family)
to quadratic polynomials, see Figure 5, left. Consequently, fθ has a qc Siegel disk if and only if θ ∈ Θbnd .
Moreover, such a qc Siegel disk contains a critical point on the boundary. Relying on such input, McMullen
in [42] developed dynamical renormalization theory for θ ∈ Θbnd , and justified the dynamical universality: the
exponential convergence of renormalizations towards the limit, see Figure 5, right.
     For two decades, it remained an open question whether dynamical universality could be promoted to
hyperbolicity. The key obstacle was to establish a version of Lemma 3.2: proving that Siegel maps remain
stable under small perturbations, provided the perturbation does not change the multiplier of the Siegel fixed
point. Here, perturbations are taken within Banach balls (cf. (3.1)) consisting of maps defined in neighborhoods
of their Siegel disks. This obstacle was resolved by employing transcendental techniques on unstable manifolds.
A priori bounds imply the compactness of the operator, thus unstable manifolds exist but may have a large
dimension. It was shown in [20] that maps on the unstable manifolds admit maximal analytic extensions as
σ-proper maps “W → C,” cf. (1.3), where W is open and dense, with a single critical orbit. Such global σ-proper
maps have codim = 1 stability as in Lemma 3.2; this stability is then promoted to codim = 1 stability in the
original class of maps, and subsequently to:
    Theorem 3.4 ([20]). Pacman/Siegel Renormalization operator is hyperbolic with dim = 1 unstable manifold
for parameters in Θbnd of periodic type.
For the Golden-mean Siegel map shown in Figure 5, the hyperbolicity was established earlier by Gaidashev and
Yampolsky with computer-assistance. We also remark that the global σ-proper structure of renormalization fixed
points (both of the quadratic-like and Siegel types) was discovered by McMullen in the 1990s. The theory of
external transcendental rays for unstable manifolds was designed in [17], leading to further applications.
    3.8 Molecule Renormalization. As we have indicated in §3.4, Theorem 4.2 implies the existence of a
compact sectorial renormalization operator Rsec rel Θ. The proof of Theorem 3.4, relying on the analysis of the
transcendental dynamics on the unstable manifolds, provides a strategy towards:
    Conjecture 3.5 (Hyperbolicity of Neutral Renormalization). There is a hyperbolic cylinder renormalization
operator Rcyl with dim = 1 unstable manifolds for all parameters in Θ.
    We recall from [20, Appendix C] that the satellite and neutral renormalizations are naturally unified into
the Molecule Renormalization; its slowed-down version is illustrated in Figure 11. A natural extension of
Conjecture 3.5:
                    J1                                   J0                             J2
                                                                             G2
                                         G1



                     J1                                                                   J2
                                                          J0
                              G02
                                                  G01                     G001

           Figure 12: Illustration to the positive entropy argument, §4.1, the airplane combinatorics.


   Conjecture 3.6 (Hyperbolicity of Molecule Renormalization). There is a hyperbolic renormalization with
dim = 1 unstable manifolds parametrized by the sped-up Molecule map as in Figure 11.
The completion of Problem 4.3 is required for Conjecture 3.6. As we have already mentioned, Conjecture 3.6 is
likely required for the satellite cases of Conjecture 1.2 and the Area Problem of ∂M.
     3.9 Puzzle Renormalization. Puzzle techniques were first employed by Branner and Hubbard in [5] to
analyze cubic polynomials with one escaping critical point. In that setting, puzzles do not cut the Julia set. A
few years later, Yoccoz introduced puzzles for quadratic polynomials and used them to reduce the MLC to the
infinitely ql renormalizable case, see (2.1). Yoccoz puzzles cut a Julia set into smaller pieces. Then the Grötzsch
inequality is used to show that such pieces shrink to points.
     In [35, 37], in the 1990s, the puzzle techniques were incorporated into the renormalization framework as shown
in Figure 9. Given a puzzle Y around a critical point so that the forward pc -orbit of ∂Y is disjoint from Y , we
can consider the first return map g of pc to Y . The domain of g consists of countably many puzzles. One of them,
say Y1 , contains a critical point and is mapped with degree 2 into Y . All other pieces are mapped with degree 1.
The renormalization g1 of g is the first return map of g into Y1 . Let X ⋐ Y1 be the next-level puzzle containing
the unique critical point. If the return time of X rel g is bigger than 1, i.e., X travels around Y under g, then the
“asymmetric modulus” grows; roughly, g1 : Y1 99K Y1 has more expansion than g : Y 99K Y . On the other hand,
g1 belongs to a central cascade if the return time of X is 1, i.e., g | X = g1 | X.
     If a central cascade is long but still finite, then the associated dynamical scales will be dominated by a certain
primitive small copy M′ of M that does not contain c. We refer to this phenomenon as virtual primitive ql.
     If g : Y 99K Y is sufficiently expanding (i.e., moduli are big, cf. the renorm-expanding case in §1.3), then there
is an Almost-Linear puzzle-parapuzzle relation [37]; i.e., the geometry of (puzzles of) g : Y 99K Y can be efficiently
transferred to the parameter plane, cf. Figure 8. This is an essential ingredient for the “regular vs stochastic”
dichotomy. Purely renorm-expanding real parameters (§1.3) are precisely Lebesgue density points for stochastic
parameters: most of their small perturbations have exponential growth of the expansion along the critical orbit
(the Collet-Eckmann condition), i.e., they are stochastic.
     4 Near-Degenerate Regime. As we mentioned in §2, the Near-Degenerate Regime provides an adequate
framework towards establishing a priori bounds. Since it operates at a basic topological level, arguments developed
for different dynamical scales are often compatible and can be merged provided the setting is appropriately
prepared. The non-dynamical foundations of the theory have been developed in [30]. Below, we will omit most
of the technical discussion and indicate only the sources of geometric control.
    On the dynamical scales with definite positive core entropy ≥ ε > 0, the theory is fully developed, see §4.1 and
§4.2. As Figure 12 illustrates, the positivity of entropy prevents dynamically invariant horizontal degeneration.
Thus, if there is a substantial degeneration, then it can be amplified at shallower levels.
    Consider the zero core entropy scales. On satellite ql levels, degeneration along non-invariant rectangles is
amplified at shallower levels, while degeneration along combinatorially invariant rectangles is amplified at deeper
levels; see Figure 13 and §4.3. In the (near-)neutral case, invariant degeneration can actually exist within parabolic
fjords because of the non-JLC; pseudo-Siegel disks are constructed to consume most of the invariant degeneration,
see the left loop of Figure 14. Its right loop illustrates a strategy to develop pseudo-Siegel disks in the remaining
near-neutral satellite cases. If achieved, this would fully unify the cases of §4.1–§4.4 and confirm, in particular,
the Satellite Case of the MLC.
     Let us now discuss the Interpolation Problem between the positive and zero entropy settings. It concerns
parameters c ∈ M that are geometrically close to the main Molecule M of M but are outside of satellite little
copies centered at M. In the dynamical plane of pc : z 2 + c, there are many geometric scales of zero-entropy nature
associated with M. A key issue is that, on these scales, the postcritical set of pc can look as if it is dense in the
Julia sets; i.e., the entropy on the postcritical set can blow up in the limit as c approaches M. (The postcritical
set is only lower semicontinuous.) This effectively compels us to deal with virtual Julia sets containing the critical
orbit up to several first returns. We briefly formulate this Virtual Renormalization setting in §4.5.
     4.1 Primitive QL levels. Assume that f1 is a primitive ql renormalization of f with a period p as in
Figure 9. Instead of mod+ (f ) = mod(V \ Kf ) as in (3.2), it is more convenient to consider the dual quantity,
called the width or the degeneration of f :
                              1                                                                        1
(4.1)           W(f ) :=                     so that       mod+ (f ) ≤ ε           iff   W(f ) ≥ K ≡     ,
                           mod+ (f )                                                                   ε

and similar for f1 . The width W(f ) is the extremal width of the family of curves connecting Kf to ∂V .
      Let us analyze how the degeneration of f1 is developed in the dynamical plane of f . Since f has p small
(filled) Julia sets of f1 , the total degeneration around these small Julia sets is W tot ≍ pW(f1 ) − Op (1), where
an additive error Op (1), that depends on p, comes from a variant of the Thin-Thick Decomposition. We can
decompose W tot = W ver + W hor , where
   • W hor is the horizontal degeneration between any pair of two small Julia sets; and
   • W ver is the vertical degeneration between ∂V and any small Julia set.
A key claim in [25] is that W ver ⪰ W tot − Op (1); i.e., the vertical part has a definite proportion. Since small Julia
sets of f1 are within the bigger Julia set of f , the claim implies

(4.2)                                    W(f ) ≥ W ver ⪰ pW(f1 ) − Op (1).

    The idea behind W ver ⪰ W hor is illustrated in Figure 12. Assume by contradiction that W hor ≫ W ver , i.e.,
W ver
      is negligible. It is a meta-principle that a degeneration should be invariant under dynamics. Therefore, the
degeneration W hor is (eventually) aligned with the Hubbard tree of f and is represented by two wide rectangles
G1 and G2 depicted on the figure as narrow (for convenience) red and blue rectangles in the pencil style. Since
W ver is negligible,
   • (most of) G2 overflows a lift G1′′ of G1 ; and
   • (most of) G1 overflows a lift G2′ of G2 and then a lift of G1′ of G1 .
This is impossible by the Grötzsch inequality and (4.2) follows.
    By applying (4.2) to f and its nth renormalization fn with a big period pn ≫ 1; we obtain

(4.3)                  W(f ) ⪰ pn W(fn ) − Opn (1) ≫ W(fn )                   if     W(fn ) ≫pn 1.

This implies a priori bounds in the primitive bounded-type ql case: the degeneration W(fm ) can not become big
because, otherwise, the degeneration of W(fm−n ) will be even bigger.
    4.2 Puzzle levels. We emphasize the following subtlety in (4.2): the period of pn is assumed to be big
but still bounded as the additive error Opn (1) depending on pn needs to be bounded.
    Assume now that the period p of f1 rel f is big. We assume here that f1 is the first ql renormalization of f of
the primitive type; this renormalization is encoded by a maximal primitive copy M1 of M. The renormalization
f 7→ f1 can be factorized using the puzzle renormalization, see Figure 9,

(4.4)                                      f 7→ g1 7→ g2 7→ · · · 7→ gk 7→ f1 .
                    J1                                                             J0       J2
                               J3                              G




                                    G n G0
                    J1                                    G0            G n G0    J0          J2
                              J3



           Figure 13: Illustration to §4.3: if G is invariant rel δ, then W(G \ G ′ ) ≥ Cδ W(G) ≫ W(G).


If the copy M1 is ε-away from the main molecule (the anti-Molecule property, cf. Figure 11) and p ≫ε 1, then the
(modified) Principal Nest of (4.4) is combinatorially substantial and provides amplification of the degeneration.
Roughly, the argument goes as follows. Using the notations of Figure 9, as X travels around Y , the [30, Covering
Lemma] efficiently spreads the degeneration around. Then the [30, Quasi-Additivity Law] collects the degeneration
along the orbit of X; this eventually leads to:

(4.5)                      W(f ) ≫ W(f1 )            if    W(f ) ≫ε 1     and    p ≫ε 1.

Together, (4.3) and (4.5) imply the a priori bounds and the MLC under the anti-molecule condition [27, 28].
    4.3 Satellite QL levels. Assume now that f1 is a satellite ql renormalization of f of bounded-type. The
key difference with the primitive case (§4.1) is the existence of combinatorially invariant rectangles G between
small Julia sets as illustrated in Figure 13. Below, we sketch how to continue the argument behind (4.3) in the
presence of such a G.
    Let us assume that most of the W tot is within G. For a small δ > 0, the (1 − δ) part of G overflows its lift
G as shown in the figure. However, before entering the rectangle G ′ , curves forming the above (1 − δ)-part of G
 ′

must travel through preperiodic Julia sets as depicted using purple color. Let us denote by G \ G ′ the family of
such purple subcurves. Since G, G ′ have almost the same width, up to “(1 − δ)”, the Grötzsch inequality implies

(4.6)                      W(G \ G ′ ) ≥ Cδ W(G),              where Cδ → ∞ as δ → 0.

    The [18, Wave Lemma] allows us to interpret the quantity W(G \ G ′ ) as the degeneration W(f2 ) on a deeper
level. Considering now f, fn and fn+1 , Estimate (4.6) gives us the following refinement of (4.3): either
  (i) W(f ) ⪰δ pn W(fn ) − Opn (1); or
 (ii) W(fn+1 ) ≥ Cδ W(fn ).
    The Alternative (ii) is prevented by the Teichmüller contraction. Indeed, given a bound p on the relative period
pm+1 /pm of fm+1 rel fm , the degeneration of W(fm ) can grow at most exponentially fast: W(fm ) = O(∆pm ).
Therefore, by selecting δ > 0 to be sufficiently small so that Cδ ≫ ∆p is sufficiently big, Alternative (ii) is
eventually prevented on some levels. We also select n sufficiently big so that pn dominates the multiplicative
constant representing “⪰δ ”. Alternative (i) implies

                      W(f ) ⪰δ pn W(fn ) − Opn (1) ≫ W(fn )                if W(fn ) ≫pn 1.

    Theorem 4.1 ([18], §4.1+§4.3). A priori bounds and the MLC hold for all ql-combinatorics of bounded-type.
In particular, the MLC holds at the period-doubling Feigenbaum parameter illustrated in Figure 2. The arguments
of §4.2 can also be integrated with those in Theorem 4.1; the combination, see [14], yields the MLC along a real
line and along any vein of the Mandelbrot set.
                                                                                       ® Ã{ ¯
                             simplify                      b0
                                                           Z                          simplify

                                                              ®
                                                              ¯

                                                  add a parabolic
                      b0                                                                          ®j
              ¯i      Z                                    b0
                                                  fjord to Z                             b0
                                                                                         Z
                       ®
                                                                                           ¯




                      b 0 Ã{ Z
                             b -1                 b0 ½Z
                                                  Z   b -1
                      Z                                                     b -1 7! Z
                                                                            Z       b0
                                                           ®                      antirenormalize rel ¯
             antirenormalize rel ®                        ¯
             (the neutral regime)                                                 (the satellite regime)


Figure 14: Left loop: the interaction between pseudo-Siegel disks and neutral sector antirenormalization, see §4.4.
Right loop: illustration to the strategy to extend the theory of pseudo-Siegel disks to the satellite case.


    4.4   Near-Neutral levels. Let us first detail the following statement:
    Theorem 4.2 ([16]). Uniform pseudo-Siegel a priori bounds hold for all neutral quadratic polynomials.
    Using the notations of §3.4, consider a neutral polynomial fθ : z 7→ e2πiθ z + z 2 for an irrational θ ∈ Θ.
Theorem 4.2 asserts that it has a sequence of nested pseudo-Siegel disks
                                                                           \
(4.7)            Zb−1 ⊇ Zb0 ⊇ Z b[1] ⊇ · · · ⊃ Zb[m] ⊇ · · · ⊇ Hf ∋ 0,
                                                                 θ
                                                                                 b[m] = H ≡ Hf ,
                                                                                 Z               θ
                                                                                 m≥−1


where H is the Mother Hedgehog (the filled postcritical set) of fθ such that every Zb[m] is almost invariant up to
q[m+1] -iterations. The disks Zb−1 and Z
                                       b0 are uniformly qc over all fθ with θ ∈ Θ.
                                                                                              [n+m]
    Under the nth sector renormalization fθ 7→ fn , cf. Figure 10, the pseudo-Siegel disk Zb        of fθ becomes
                                                                                                   fθ
  [m]
Zbfn of fn ; i.e., every Z
                         b[m] becomes uniformly qc after applying the mth renormalization.
     Figure 14, the left loop, illustrates the interaction of Zb0 , Zb−1 with sector antirenormalization. If the rotation
number of fn is close to 0, then the α and β fixed points are close to each other and ∂ Zbf0n travels through the gap
between α = 0 and β. The pseudo-Siegel disk Zbf−1     n
                                                         is obtained by adding a parabolic fjord to Z  b0 . The fjord is
                                                                                                        fn
bounded by a dam located inside an invariant rectangle, depicted in a pencil style. We say that Zbf0n is regularized
to Zb−1 . Under the antirenormalization, Zb−1 become Zb0 , and the procedure can be repeated. If the rotation
    fn                                       fn            fn−1
                                                                      b−1 .
number of fn is away from 0, then there is no regularization: Zbf0n = Z fn
    Informally, since antirenormalization has contracting properties, we expect that the “non-invariance error”
of Z
   b[m] is uniformly bounded by a geometric series. The [16] justifies such a property by employing the near-
degenerate analyses in the original plane of fθ . The sectorial bounds (cf. Figure 10) are then justified in [19] in
the a posteriori setting.
     The right loop in Figure 14 illustrates a strategy, developed jointly with Lyubich, for extending the theory
of pseudo-Siegel disks to the near-neutral setting. On this loop, the antirenormalization is taken rel β. For many
combinatorics, this has been already justified and integrated with §4.1-§4.3. If the strategy is fully realized, then
this would imply, in particular, the satellite case of the MLC.
    Problem 4.3. Establish pseudo-Siegel a priori bounds in the remaining unbounded satellite ql cases.
    4.5 Virtual near-Molecule Renormalization. Consider now a general case, when f1 is the first ql
renormalization of f . The satellite case has been discussed in §4.3 and §4.4. Let us assume that f1 is primitive ql.
The renormalization f 7→ f1 is encoded by a maximal primitive copy M1 ⊂ M. There is a canonical sequence of
satellite copies of M

             M ≡ M(0) ⊋ M(1) ⊋ · · · ⊋ M(n) ⊋ M(n+1) ,                    M1 ⊂ M \ M(1) ,        n≥0

such that M(m) is a maximal satellite subcopy of M(m−1) , M1 is in the 1/2-decoration of M(n+1) , and M1 is in
a small (i.e., not the 1/2) decoration of M(m) for all m ≤ n. The copy M1 is close to the main Molecule if and
only if the period of M(n+1) is big.
    The puzzle levels of §4.2 provide a satisfactory control on scales between M(n) and M1 (the latter copy
is smaller) and fail on scales between M and M(n) , which we refer as virtual Molecule. The virtual Molecule
case naturally consists of two subcases: virtual bounded-type satellite ql (when n ≫ 1 and the relative periods of
M(s+1) rel M(s) are bounded) and virtual near-Neutral (n = 0).
    Interpolation Problem 4.4. Develop a Virtual Molecule version of the Near-Degenerate Regime.
Problems 4.3, 4.4 and the arguments in §4.1, §4.2, §4.3 §4.4 should imply the full MLC.
    Jointly with Kahn and Lyubich, we put forward a strategy to approach Problem 4.4 by considering partially
invariant virtual Julia sets of M(s) – they are connected hulls of the corresponding Cantor small Julia sets within
Jf and contain the critical orbit only up to an appropriate number of first returns. A posteriori, bounds for
virtual Julia sets can be deduced by assuming a uniform hyperbolicity of the renormalization associated with M;
cf. Problem 3.1. The strategy towards Problem 4.4 is to develop such control a priori.
    Acknowledgments. I would like to thank Misha Lyubich, Yusheng Luo, and Kostya Drach for many useful
discussions regarding the context of this Note.
    References
 [1] A. Avila, J. Kahn, M. Lyubich, and W. Shen. Combinatorial rigidity for unicritical polynomials. Annals of
     Mathematics, 170, 783–797, 2009.
 [2] A. Avila and M. Lyubich. Lebesgue measure of Feigenbaum Julia sets. Annals of Mathematics, 195, 1–88,
     2022.
 [3] A. Avila, M. Lyubich, and W. de Melo. Regular or stochastic dynamics in real analytic families of unimodal
     maps. Inventiones Mathematicae, 154, 451–550, 2003.
 [4] A. Avila and C. G. Moreira. Statistical properties of unimodal maps: the quadratic family. Annals of
     Mathematics, 161, 831–881, 2005.
 [5] B. Branner and J. H. Hubbard. The iteration of cubic polynomials. Part II. Acta Mathematica, 169, 229–325,
     1992.
 [6] X. Buff and A. Chéritat. Quadratic Julia sets of positive area. Annals of Mathematics, 176, 673–746, 2012.
 [7] J. Cepelewicz. The Quest to Decode the Mandelbrot Set, Math’s Famed Fractal. Quanta Magazine, 2024.
 [8] D. Cheraghi. Topology of irrationally indifferent attractors. Accepted for publication in Annales Scientifiques
     de l’École Normale Supérieure, 2025. To appear.
 [9] P. Coullet and C. Tresser. Itérations d’endomorphismes et groupe de renormalisation. Journal de Physique,
     Colloque, 39, 5–25, 1978.
[10] A. Douady and J. H. Hubbard. Étude dynamique des polynômes complexes. Publications Mathématiques
     d’Orsay, 1984–1985. Orsay preprints 84-02 and 85-04.
[11] A. Douady and J. H. Hubbard. On the dynamics of polynomial-like mappings. Annales Scientifiques de
     l’École Normale Supérieure (4), 18, 287–343, 1985.
[12] A. Douady and J. H. Hubbard. A proof of Thurston’s topological characterization of rational functions. Acta
     Mathematica, 171, 263–297, 1993.
[13] K. Drach and D. Dudko. Near-Degenerate Regime in Transcendental Dynamics. Manuscript, 2025.
[14] D. Dudko, J. Kahn, and M. Lyubich. Local connectivity of the Mandelbrot set along the real line. Manuscript,
     2022.
[15] D. Dudko and Y. Luo. Sierpiński carpet hyperbolic components of disjoint type are bounded. Preprint,
     arXiv:2509.25658, 2025.
[16] D. Dudko and M. Lyubich. Uniform a priori bounds for neutral renormalization. Preprint, arXiv:2210.09280,
     2022.
[17] D. Dudko and M. Lyubich. Local connectivity of the Mandelbrot set at some satellite parameters of bounded
     type. Geometric and Functional Analysis, 33, 1–136, 2023.
[18] D. Dudko and M. Lyubich. MLC at Feigenbaum points.               Accepted for publication in Publications
     Mathématiques de l’IHÉS, 2025. To appear.
[19] D. Dudko and M. Lyubich. Uniform a priori bounds for neutral renormalization. Variation I: Sector
     Renormalization. Manuscript, 2024.
[20] D. Dudko, M. Lyubich, and N. Selinger. Pacman renormalization and self-similarity of the Mandelbrot set
     near Siegel parameters. Journal of the American Mathematical Society, 33, 653–733, 2020.
[21] M. Feigenbaum. Quantitative universality for a class of nonlinear transformations. Journal of Statistical
     Physics, 19, 25–52, 1978.
[22] J. Graczyk and G. G. Świątek. Generic hyperbolicity in the logistic family. Annals of Mathematics, 146,
     1–52, 1997.
[23] J. H. Hubbard. Local connectivity of Julia sets and bifurcation loci: three theorems of J.-C. Yoccoz. In
     Topological Methods in Modern Mathematics, pages 467–511. Publish or Perish, Houston, 1992.
[24] H. Inou and M. Shishikura. The renormalization for parabolic fixed points and their perturbations.
     Manuscript, https://www.math.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~mitsu/pararenorm/, 2008.
[25] J. Kahn. A priori bounds for some infinitely renormalizable quadratics: I. Bounded primitive combinatorics.
     Preprint, arXiv:math/0609045, 2006.
[26] J. Kahn. Hyperbolic Components and Limits of Extremal Length.            MSRI Talks, https://vimeo.com/
     704224013, https://vimeo.com/700148806 ,2022.
[27] J. Kahn and M. Lyubich. A priori bounds for some infinitely renormalizable quadratics: II. Decorations.
     Annales Scientifiques de l’École Normale Supérieure, 41, 57–84, 2008.
[28] J. Kahn and M. Lyubich. A priori bounds for some infinitely renormalizable quadratics: III. Molecules. In:
     Complex Dynamics: Families and Friends (ed.: D. Schleicher), A K Peters, Ltd., 2009.
[29] J. Kahn and M. Lyubich. Local connectivity of Julia sets for unicritical polynomials. Annals of Mathematics,
     170, 413–426, 2009.
[30] J. Kahn and M. Lyubich. The quasi-additivity law in conformal geometry. Annals of Mathematics, 169,
     561–593, 2009.
[31] O. Kozlovski, W. Shen, and S. van Strien. Density of hyperbolicity in dimension one. Annals of Mathematics,
     166, 145–182, 2007.
[32] O. Kozlovski, W. Shen, and S. van Strien. Rigidity for real polynomials. Annals of Mathematics, 165,
     749–841, 2007.
[33] O. E. Lanford. A computer-assisted proof of the Feigenbaum conjectures. In Universality in Chaos, 2nd ed.,
     pages 245–252. Routledge, 2017.
[34] W. R. Lim. A priori bounds and degeneration of Herman rings with bounded type rotation number.
     Inventiones Mathematicae, 2025.

[35] M. Lyubich. Dynamics of quadratic polynomials. I, II. Acta Mathematica, 178, 185–297, 1997.
[36] M. Lyubich. Feigenbaum–Coullet–Tresser universality and Milnor’s Hairiness Conjecture.            Annals of
     Mathematics, 149, 319–420, 1999.
[37] M. Lyubich. Dynamics of quadratic polynomials III: parapuzzle and SBR measures. Astérisque, 261, 173–200,
     2000.
[38] M. Lyubich. Almost every real quadratic map is either regular or stochastic. Annals of Mathematics, 156,
     1–78, 2002.
[39] M. Lyubich and J. Milnor. The Fibonacci unimodal map. Journal of the American Mathematical Society, 6,
     425–457, 1993.
[40] C. T. McMullen. Complex Dynamics and Renormalization. Annals of Mathematics Studies, Vol. 135.
     Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1994.
[41] C. T. McMullen. Renormalization and Three Manifolds Which Fiber over the Circle. Princeton University
     Press, Princeton, NJ, 1996.

[42] C. T. McMullen. Self-similarity of Siegel disks and Hausdorff dimension of Julia sets. Acta Mathematica,
     180, 247–292, 1998.
[43] M. Shishikura. The Hausdorff dimension of the boundary of the Mandelbrot set and Julia sets. Annals of
     Mathematics, 147, 225–267, 1998.

[44] M. Shishikura and F. Yang. The high type quadratic Siegel disks are Jordan domains. Journal of the
     European Mathematical Society (JEMS), 27, 4501–4562, 2025.
[45] D. Smania. Puzzle geometry and rigidity: the Fibonacci cycle is hyperbolic. Journal of the American
     Mathematical Society, 20, 629–673, 2007.

[46] D. Smania. Solenoidal attractors with bounded combinatorics are shy. Annals of Mathematics, 191, 1–79,
     2020.
[47] D. Sullivan. Quasiconformal homeomorphisms and dynamics, topology and geometry. In Proc. Int. Cong.
     Math. (ICM), Berkeley, Vol. II, pages 1216–1228, 1986.
[48] D. Sullivan. Bounds, quadratic differentials and renormalization conjectures. In Mathematics Into the Twenty-
     first Century, AMS Centennial Publications, Vol. 2, 1992.
[49] L. Tan. Similarity Between the Mandelbrot Set and Julia Sets. Communications in Mathematical Physics,
     134, 587–617, 1990.
[50] W. P. Thurston. Hyperbolic structures on 3-manifolds I: Deformation of acylindrical manifolds. Annals of
     Mathematics, 124, 203–246, 1986.
